data/part-4/1-update-strategies-and-prometheus.md, before:

---
path: '/part-4/1-update-strategies-and-prometheus'
title: 'Update Strategies and Prometheus'
hidden: false
---

<text-box variant='learningObjectives' name='Learning Objectives'>

After this section you can

- Compare update strategies

- **Confidently** deploy software with canary releases

- Use Prometheus for custom queries

</text-box>

In the last part we did automated updates with a deployment pipeline. The update *just worked* but we have no idea how the update actually happened, other than that a pod was changed, and we can make the update process safer to help us reach a higher number of [nines](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/High_availability).

There are multiple update/deployment/release strategies. We will focus on two of them and how to implement them.

- Rolling update
- Canary release

Both of these update strategies are designed to make sure that the application works during and after an update. Rather than updating every pod at the same time the idea is to update the pods one at a time and confirm that the application works.

### Rolling update ###

By default Kubernetes initiates a "rolling update" when we change the image. That means that every pod is updated sequentially. The rolling update is a great default since it enables the application to be available during the update. If we decide to push an image that does not work the update will automatically stop.

I've prepared an application with 5 versions here. v1 works always, v2 never works, v3 works 90% of the time, v4 will die after 20 seconds and v5 works always.

**deployment.yaml**

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: flaky-update-dep
spec:
  replicas: 4
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: flaky-update
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: flaky-update
    spec:
      containers:
        - name: flaky-update
          image: jakousa/dwk-app8:v1
```

```console
$ kubectl apply -f deployment.yaml
  deployment.apps/flaky-update-dep created

$ kubectl get po
  NAME                                READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
  flaky-update-dep-7b5fd9ffc7-27cxt   1/1     Running   0          87s
  flaky-update-dep-7b5fd9ffc7-mp8vd   1/1     Running   0          88s
  flaky-update-dep-7b5fd9ffc7-m4smm   1/1     Running   0          87s
  flaky-update-dep-7b5fd9ffc7-nzl98   1/1     Running   0          88s
```

Now change the tag to v2 and apply it.

```console
$ kubectl apply -f deployment.yaml
$ kubectl get po --watch
...
```

You can see the rolling update performed but unfortunately the application no longer works. The application is running, it's just that there's a bug which prevents it from working correctly. This is where *ReadinessProbes* come in.

**Kubernetes Best Practices - Kubernetes Health Checks with Readiness and Liveness Probes**

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/mxEvAPQRwhw" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

With a *ReadinessProbe* Kubernetes can check if a pod is ready to process requests. The application has an endpoint [/healthz](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/43380939/where-does-the-convention-of-using-healthz-for-application-health-checks-come-f) in port 3541 we can test for health. It will simply answer with status code 500 if it's not working and 200 if it is.

Let's roll the version back to v1 as well so we can test the update to v2 again.

**deployment.yaml**

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: flaky-update-dep
spec:
  replicas: 4
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: flaky-update
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: flaky-update
    spec:
      containers:
        - name: flaky-update
          image: jakousa/dwk-app8:v1
          readinessProbe:
            initialDelaySeconds: 10 # Initial delay until the readiness is tested
            periodSeconds: 5 # How often to test
            httpGet:
               path: /healthz
               port: 3541
```

Here the *initalDelay* and *periodSeconds* will mean that the probe is sent 10 seconds after the container is up and every 5 seconds after that. Now if we change the tag to v2 and apply it

```console
$ kubectl apply -f deployment.yaml
  deployment.apps/flaky-update-dep configured

$ kubectl get po
  NAME                                READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
  flaky-update-dep-f5c79dbc-8lnqm     1/1     Running   0          115s
  flaky-update-dep-f5c79dbc-86fmd     1/1     Running   0          116s
  flaky-update-dep-f5c79dbc-qzs9p     1/1     Running   0          98s
  flaky-update-dep-54888b877b-dkctl   0/1     Running   0          25s
  flaky-update-dep-54888b877b-dbw29   0/1     Running   0          24s
```

Here three of the pods are completely functional, one of v1 was dropped to make way for the v2 ones but since they do not work they are never READY and the update can not continue.

<exercise name='Exercise 4.01: Readiness Probe'>

  Create a ReadinessProbe for "ping/pong" application. It should be ready when it has a connection to database.

  And another ReadinessProbe for "main" application. It should be ready when it can receive data from pingpong application.

  Test that it works by applying everything but the database statefulset. The output of `kubectl get po` should look like this before the database is available:

  ```console
NAME                           READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
mainapp-dep-7f49547cf4-ttj4f   1/2     Running   0          21s
pingpong-dep-9b698d6fb-jdgq9   0/1     Running   0          21s
  ```

  Adding the database should automatically move the READY states to 2/2 and 1/1 for main and pingpong respectively.

</exercise>

But as the application is working we can just push a new update on top of the v2. Let's try the v4 which our colleague has assured us will "surely" work:

```console
$ kubectl apply -f deployment.yaml
  deployment.apps/flaky-update-dep configured
```

Now the ReadinessProbe may pass for the first 20 seconds but soon enough every pod will break. Unfortunately *ReadinessProbe* cannot do anything about it, the deploy was successful but the application is buggy.

```console
$ kubectl get po
  NAME                               READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
  flaky-update-dep-dd78944f4-vv27w   0/1     Running   0          111s
  flaky-update-dep-dd78944f4-dnmcg   0/1     Running   0          110s
  flaky-update-dep-dd78944f4-zlh4v   0/1     Running   0          92s
  flaky-update-dep-dd78944f4-zczmw   0/1     Running   0          90s
```

Let's roll back to the previous version. This may come in handy if you ever are in a panic mode and need to roll an update back:

```console
$ kubectl rollout undo deployment flaky-update-dep
  deployment.apps/flaky-update-dep rolled back
```

There's another probe that could've helped us in a situation like this. *LivenessProbes* can be configured similarly to *ReadinessProbes*, but if the check fails the container will be restarted.

**deployment.yaml**

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: flaky-update-dep
spec:
  replicas: 4
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: flaky-update
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: flaky-update
    spec:
      containers:
        - name: flaky-update
          image: jakousa/dwk-app8:v1
          readinessProbe:
            initialDelaySeconds: 10 # Initial delay until the readiness is tested
            periodSeconds: 5 # How often to test
            httpGet:
               path: /healthz
               port: 3541
          livenessProbe:
            initialDelaySeconds: 20 # Initial delay until the liveness is tested
            periodSeconds: 5 # How often to test
            httpGet:
               path: /healthz
               port: 3541
```

With this let's just deploy the worst of the versions, v3.

```console
$ kubectl apply -f deployment.yaml
  deployment.apps/flaky-update-dep configured
```

After a while it may look something like this (if you're lucky).

```console
$ kubectl get po
  NAME                                READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
  flaky-update-dep-fd65cd468-4vgwx   1/1     Running   3          2m30s
  flaky-update-dep-fd65cd468-9h877   0/1     Running   4          2m49s
  flaky-update-dep-fd65cd468-jpz2m   0/1     Running   3          2m13s
  flaky-update-dep-fd65cd468-529nr   1/1     Running   4          2m50s
```

At least something is working!

A *StartupProbe* can delay the liveness probe so that an application with a longer startup can take its time. You may require it in real life but is not discussed further on this course

<exercise name='Exercise 4.02: Project v1.7'>

  Create the required Probes and endpoint for the project to ensure that it's working and connected to a database.

  Test that it's indeed working with a version without database access, for example by supplying a wrong database url or credentials.

</exercise>

### Canary release ###

With rolling updates, when including the Probes, we could create releases with no downtime for users. Sometimes this is not enough and you need to be able to do a partial release for some users and get data for the new / upcoming release. Canary release is the term used to describe a release strategy in which we introduce a subset of the users to a new version of the application. Then increasing the number of users in the new version until the old version is no longer used.

At the moment of writing this Canary is not a strategy for deployments. This may be due to the ambiguity of the methods for canary release. We will use [Argo Rollouts](https://argoproj.github.io/argo-rollouts/) to test one type of canary release. At the moment of writing the latest release is v0.8.2.

```console
$ kubectl create namespace argo-rollouts
$ kubectl apply -n argo-rollouts -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/argoproj/argo-rollouts/stable/manifests/install.yaml
```

Now we have a new resource "Rollout" available to us. The Rollout will replace our previously created deployment and enable us to use a new field:

**rollout.yaml**

```yaml
apiVersion: argoproj.io/v1alpha1
kind: Rollout
metadata:
  name: flaky-update-dep
spec:
  replicas: 4
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: flaky-update
  strategy:
    canary:
      steps:
      - setWeight: 25
      - pause:
          duration: 30s
      - setWeight: 50
      - pause:
          duration: 30s
  template:
    ...
```

The above will first move 25% of the pods to a new version (in our case 1 pod) after which it will wait for 20 seconds, move to 50% of pods and then wait for 20 seconds until every pod is updated. A kubectl plugin from Argo also offers us promote command to enable us to pause the rollout indefinitely and then use the promote to move forward.

There are other options such as the familiar *maxUnavailable* but the defaults will work for us. However, simply rolling slowly to production will not be enough for a canary deployment. Just like with rolling updates we need to know the status of the application.

With another custom resource we've already installed with Argo Rollouts called "AnalysisTemplate" we will be able to define a test that doesn't let the broken versions through.

If you don't have Prometheus available go back to part 2 for a reminder. We'll have the analysis done as the version is updating. If the analysis fails it will automatically cancel the rollout.

```yaml
  ...
  strategy:
    canary:
      steps:
      - setWeight: 50
      - analysis:
          templates:
          - templateName: restart-rate
  template:
  ...
```

<exercise name='Exercise 4.03: Prometheus'>

  We've been using Prometheus since part 2, but basically we've only heard the name and seen some nice graphs on Grafana. Let's do a single hands-on query to learn more.

  Start a Prometheus with helm (see part 2) and use port-forward to access the gui website. Port 9090 is the default for Prometheus:

```console
$ kubectl -n prometheus get pods
 NAME                                                              READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
 kube-prometheus-stack-1602-operator-557c9c4f5-wbsqc               2/2     Running   0          17h
 kube-prometheus-stack-1602180058-prometheus-node-exporter-tr7ns   1/1     Running   0          17h
 kube-prometheus-stack-1602180058-grafana-59cd48d794-4459m         2/2     Running   0          17h
 prometheus-kube-prometheus-stack-1602-prometheus-0                3/3     Running   1          17h
 kube-prometheus-stack-1602180058-prometheus-node-exporter-ft7dg   1/1     Running   0          17h
 kube-prometheus-stack-1602180058-prometheus-node-exporter-nt8cp   1/1     Running   0          17h
 kube-prometheus-stack-1602180058-kube-state-metrics-55dccdkkz6w   1/1     Running   0          17h
 alertmanager-kube-prometheus-stack-1602-alertmanager-0            2/2     Running   0          17h

$ kubectl -n prometheus port-forward prometheus-kube-prometheus-stack-1602-prometheus-0 9090:9090
  Forwarding from 127.0.0.1:9090 -> 9090
  Forwarding from [::1]:9090 -> 9090
```

  And now accessing [http://localhost:9090](http://localhost:9090) will allow us to write queries. **Write a query** that shows the number of pods created by StatefulSets in "prometheus" namespace. For the above setup the "Value" should be 2 different pods. Something similar:

  <table>
    <thead>
      <tr><td>Element</td><td>Value</td></tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
      <tr><td>Scalar</td><td>2</td></tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>

  Query for "kube_pod_info" should have the required fields to filter through. See [documentation](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/querying/basics/) for help with querying.

</exercise>

The CRD (Custom Resource Definition) AnalysisTemplate will, in our case, use Prometheus and send a query. The query result is then compared to a preset value. In this simplified case if the number of overall restarts over the last 2 minutes is higher than two it will fail the analysis. *initialDelay* will ensure that the test is not run until the data required is gathered. Note that this is not a robust test as the production version may crash and prevent the update even if the update itself is working correctly. The *AnalysisTemplate* is not dependant on Prometheus and could use a different source, such as a JSON endpoint, instead.

**analysistemplate.yaml**

```yaml
apiVersion: argoproj.io/v1alpha1
kind: AnalysisTemplate
metadata:
  name: restart-rate
spec:
  metrics:
  - name: restart-rate
    initialDelay: 2m
    successCondition: result < 2
    provider:
      prometheus:
        address: http://kube-prometheus-stack-1602-prometheus.prometheus.svc.cluster.local:9090 # DNS name for my Prometheus, find yours with kubectl describe svc ...
        query: |
          scalar(
            sum(kube_pod_container_status_restarts_total{namespace="default", container="flaky-update"}) -
            sum(kube_pod_container_status_restarts_total{namespace="default", container="flaky-update"} offset 2m)
          )
```

With the new Rollout and AnalysisTemplate we can safely try to deploy any version. Deploy for v2 is prevented with the Probes we set up. Deploy for v3 will automatically roll back when it notices that it has random crashes. And v4 will also fail. The short 2 minutes to test may still let a version pass. With more steps and pauses for analysis and more robust tests we could be more confident in our solution. Use `kubectl describe ar flaky-update-dep-6d5669dc9f-2-1` to get info for a specific AnalysisRun.

<exercise name='Exercise 4.04: Project v1.8'>

  Create an AnalysisTemplate for the project that will follow the cpu usage of all containers in the namespace.

  If the CPU usage **rate** sum for the namespace increases above a set value (you may choose a good hardcoded value for your project, may vary) within 10 minutes revert the update.

  Make sure that the application doesn't get updated if the value is set too low.

</exercise>

### Other deployment strategies ###

Kubernetes supports Recreate strategy which takes down the previous pods and replaces everything with the updated one. This creates a moment of downtime for the application but ensures that different versions are not running at the same time. Argo Rollouts supports BlueGreen strategy, in which a new version is run side by side to the new one but traffic is switched between the two at a certain point, such as after running update scripts or after your QA team has approved the new version.

<exercise name='Exercise 4.05: Project v1.9'>

  Speaking of updating.
  Our todo application could use "Done" field for todos that are already done.
  It should be a PUT request to `/todos/<id>`.

</exercise>

<quiz id="76e960b7-c5df-4cf4-ae58-e4bc486d02b2"></quiz>

Commit message:

rename main app as "Log output"

data/part-4/1-update-strategies-and-prometheus.md, after:

---
path: '/part-4/1-update-strategies-and-prometheus'
title: 'Update Strategies and Prometheus'
hidden: false
---

<text-box variant='learningObjectives' name='Learning Objectives'>

After this section you can

- Compare update strategies

- **Confidently** deploy software with canary releases

- Use Prometheus for custom queries

</text-box>

In the last part we did automated updates with a deployment pipeline. The update *just worked* but we have no idea how the update actually happened, other than that a pod was changed, and we can make the update process safer to help us reach a higher number of [nines](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/High_availability).

There are multiple update/deployment/release strategies. We will focus on two of them and how to implement them.

- Rolling update
- Canary release

Both of these update strategies are designed to make sure that the application works during and after an update. Rather than updating every pod at the same time the idea is to update the pods one at a time and confirm that the application works.

### Rolling update ###

By default Kubernetes initiates a "rolling update" when we change the image. That means that every pod is updated sequentially. The rolling update is a great default since it enables the application to be available during the update. If we decide to push an image that does not work the update will automatically stop.

I've prepared an application with 5 versions here. v1 works always, v2 never works, v3 works 90% of the time, v4 will die after 20 seconds and v5 works always.

**deployment.yaml**

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: flaky-update-dep
spec:
  replicas: 4
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: flaky-update
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: flaky-update
    spec:
      containers:
        - name: flaky-update
          image: jakousa/dwk-app8:v1
```

```console
$ kubectl apply -f deployment.yaml
  deployment.apps/flaky-update-dep created

$ kubectl get po
  NAME                                READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
  flaky-update-dep-7b5fd9ffc7-27cxt   1/1     Running   0          87s
  flaky-update-dep-7b5fd9ffc7-mp8vd   1/1     Running   0          88s
  flaky-update-dep-7b5fd9ffc7-m4smm   1/1     Running   0          87s
  flaky-update-dep-7b5fd9ffc7-nzl98   1/1     Running   0          88s
```

Now change the tag to v2 and apply it.

```console
$ kubectl apply -f deployment.yaml
$ kubectl get po --watch
...
```

You can see the rolling update performed but unfortunately the application no longer works. The application is running, it's just that there's a bug which prevents it from working correctly. This is where *ReadinessProbes* come in.

**Kubernetes Best Practices - Kubernetes Health Checks with Readiness and Liveness Probes**

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/mxEvAPQRwhw" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

With a *ReadinessProbe* Kubernetes can check if a pod is ready to process requests. The application has an endpoint [/healthz](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/43380939/where-does-the-convention-of-using-healthz-for-application-health-checks-come-f) in port 3541 we can test for health. It will simply answer with status code 500 if it's not working and 200 if it is.

Let's roll the version back to v1 as well so we can test the update to v2 again.

**deployment.yaml**

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: flaky-update-dep
spec:
  replicas: 4
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: flaky-update
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: flaky-update
    spec:
      containers:
        - name: flaky-update
          image: jakousa/dwk-app8:v1
          readinessProbe:
            initialDelaySeconds: 10 # Initial delay until the readiness is tested
            periodSeconds: 5 # How often to test
            httpGet:
               path: /healthz
               port: 3541
```

Here the *initalDelay* and *periodSeconds* will mean that the probe is sent 10 seconds after the container is up and every 5 seconds after that. Now if we change the tag to v2 and apply it

```console
$ kubectl apply -f deployment.yaml
  deployment.apps/flaky-update-dep configured

$ kubectl get po
  NAME                                READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
  flaky-update-dep-f5c79dbc-8lnqm     1/1     Running   0          115s
  flaky-update-dep-f5c79dbc-86fmd     1/1     Running   0          116s
  flaky-update-dep-f5c79dbc-qzs9p     1/1     Running   0          98s
  flaky-update-dep-54888b877b-dkctl   0/1     Running   0          25s
  flaky-update-dep-54888b877b-dbw29   0/1     Running   0          24s
```

Here three of the pods are completely functional, one of v1 was dropped to make way for the v2 ones but since they do not work they are never READY and the update can not continue.

<exercise name='Exercise 4.01: Readiness Probe'>

  Create a ReadinessProbe for "Ping-pong" application. It should be ready when it has a connection to database.

  And another ReadinessProbe for "Log output" application. It should be ready when it can receive data from "Ping-pong" application.

  Test that it works by applying everything but the database statefulset. The output of `kubectl get po` should look like this before the database is available:

  ```console
NAME                             READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
logoutput-dep-7f49547cf4-ttj4f   1/2     Running   0          21s
pingpong-dep-9b698d6fb-jdgq9     0/1     Running   0          21s
  ```

  Adding the database should automatically move the READY states to 2/2 and 1/1 for "Log output" and "Ping-pong" respectively.

</exercise>

But as the application is working we can just push a new update on top of the v2. Let's try the v4 which our colleague has assured us will "surely" work:

```console
$ kubectl apply -f deployment.yaml
  deployment.apps/flaky-update-dep configured
```

Now the ReadinessProbe may pass for the first 20 seconds but soon enough every pod will break. Unfortunately *ReadinessProbe* cannot do anything about it, the deploy was successful but the application is buggy.

```console
$ kubectl get po
  NAME                               READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
  flaky-update-dep-dd78944f4-vv27w   0/1     Running   0          111s
  flaky-update-dep-dd78944f4-dnmcg   0/1     Running   0          110s
  flaky-update-dep-dd78944f4-zlh4v   0/1     Running   0          92s
  flaky-update-dep-dd78944f4-zczmw   0/1     Running   0          90s
```

Let's roll back to the previous version. This may come in handy if you ever are in a panic mode and need to roll an update back:

```console
$ kubectl rollout undo deployment flaky-update-dep
  deployment.apps/flaky-update-dep rolled back
```

There's another probe that could've helped us in a situation like this. *LivenessProbes* can be configured similarly to *ReadinessProbes*, but if the check fails the container will be restarted.

**deployment.yaml**

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: flaky-update-dep
spec:
  replicas: 4
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: flaky-update
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: flaky-update
    spec:
      containers:
        - name: flaky-update
          image: jakousa/dwk-app8:v1
          readinessProbe:
            initialDelaySeconds: 10 # Initial delay until the readiness is tested
            periodSeconds: 5 # How often to test
            httpGet:
               path: /healthz
               port: 3541
          livenessProbe:
            initialDelaySeconds: 20 # Initial delay until the liveness is tested
            periodSeconds: 5 # How often to test
            httpGet:
               path: /healthz
               port: 3541
```

With this let's just deploy the worst of the versions, v3.

```console
$ kubectl apply -f deployment.yaml
  deployment.apps/flaky-update-dep configured
```

After a while it may look something like this (if you're lucky).

```console
$ kubectl get po
  NAME                                READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
  flaky-update-dep-fd65cd468-4vgwx   1/1     Running   3          2m30s
  flaky-update-dep-fd65cd468-9h877   0/1     Running   4          2m49s
  flaky-update-dep-fd65cd468-jpz2m   0/1     Running   3          2m13s
  flaky-update-dep-fd65cd468-529nr   1/1     Running   4          2m50s
```

At least something is working!

A *StartupProbe* can delay the liveness probe so that an application with a longer startup can take its time. You may require it in real life but is not discussed further on this course

<exercise name='Exercise 4.02: Project v1.7'>

  Create the required Probes and endpoint for the project to ensure that it's working and connected to a database.

  Test that it's indeed working with a version without database access, for example by supplying a wrong database url or credentials.

</exercise>

### Canary release ###

With rolling updates, when including the Probes, we could create releases with no downtime for users. Sometimes this is not enough and you need to be able to do a partial release for some users and get data for the new / upcoming release. Canary release is the term used to describe a release strategy in which we introduce a subset of the users to a new version of the application. Then increasing the number of users in the new version until the old version is no longer used.

At the moment of writing this Canary is not a strategy for deployments. This may be due to the ambiguity of the methods for canary release. We will use [Argo Rollouts](https://argoproj.github.io/argo-rollouts/) to test one type of canary release. At the moment of writing the latest release is v0.8.2.

```console
$ kubectl create namespace argo-rollouts
$ kubectl apply -n argo-rollouts -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/argoproj/argo-rollouts/stable/manifests/install.yaml
```

Now we have a new resource "Rollout" available to us. The Rollout will replace our previously created deployment and enable us to use a new field:

**rollout.yaml**

```yaml
apiVersion: argoproj.io/v1alpha1
kind: Rollout
metadata:
  name: flaky-update-dep
spec:
  replicas: 4
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: flaky-update
  strategy:
    canary:
      steps:
      - setWeight: 25
      - pause:
          duration: 30s
      - setWeight: 50
      - pause:
          duration: 30s
  template:
    ...
```

The above will first move 25% of the pods to a new version (in our case 1 pod) after which it will wait for 20 seconds, move to 50% of pods and then wait for 20 seconds until every pod is updated. A kubectl plugin from Argo also offers us promote command to enable us to pause the rollout indefinitely and then use the promote to move forward.

There are other options such as the familiar *maxUnavailable* but the defaults will work for us. However, simply rolling slowly to production will not be enough for a canary deployment. Just like with rolling updates we need to know the status of the application.

With another custom resource we've already installed with Argo Rollouts called "AnalysisTemplate" we will be able to define a test that doesn't let the broken versions through.

If you don't have Prometheus available go back to part 2 for a reminder. We'll have the analysis done as the version is updating. If the analysis fails it will automatically cancel the rollout.

```yaml
  ...
  strategy:
    canary:
      steps:
      - setWeight: 50
      - analysis:
          templates:
          - templateName: restart-rate
  template:
  ...
```

<exercise name='Exercise 4.03: Prometheus'>

  We've been using Prometheus since part 2, but basically we've only heard the name and seen some nice graphs on Grafana. Let's do a single hands-on query to learn more.

  Start a Prometheus with helm (see part 2) and use port-forward to access the gui website. Port 9090 is the default for Prometheus:

```console
$ kubectl -n prometheus get pods
 NAME                                                              READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
 kube-prometheus-stack-1602-operator-557c9c4f5-wbsqc               2/2     Running   0          17h
 kube-prometheus-stack-1602180058-prometheus-node-exporter-tr7ns   1/1     Running   0          17h
 kube-prometheus-stack-1602180058-grafana-59cd48d794-4459m         2/2     Running   0          17h
 prometheus-kube-prometheus-stack-1602-prometheus-0                3/3     Running   1          17h
 kube-prometheus-stack-1602180058-prometheus-node-exporter-ft7dg   1/1     Running   0          17h
 kube-prometheus-stack-1602180058-prometheus-node-exporter-nt8cp   1/1     Running   0          17h
 kube-prometheus-stack-1602180058-kube-state-metrics-55dccdkkz6w   1/1     Running   0          17h
 alertmanager-kube-prometheus-stack-1602-alertmanager-0            2/2     Running   0          17h

$ kubectl -n prometheus port-forward prometheus-kube-prometheus-stack-1602-prometheus-0 9090:9090
  Forwarding from 127.0.0.1:9090 -> 9090
  Forwarding from [::1]:9090 -> 9090
```

  And now accessing [http://localhost:9090](http://localhost:9090) will allow us to write queries. **Write a query** that shows the number of pods created by StatefulSets in "prometheus" namespace. For the above setup the "Value" should be 2 different pods. Something similar:

  <table>
    <thead>
      <tr><td>Element</td><td>Value</td></tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
      <tr><td>Scalar</td><td>2</td></tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>

  Query for "kube_pod_info" should have the required fields to filter through. See [documentation](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/querying/basics/) for help with querying.

</exercise>

The CRD (Custom Resource Definition) AnalysisTemplate will, in our case, use Prometheus and send a query. The query result is then compared to a preset value. In this simplified case if the number of overall restarts over the last 2 minutes is higher than two it will fail the analysis. *initialDelay* will ensure that the test is not run until the data required is gathered. Note that this is not a robust test as the production version may crash and prevent the update even if the update itself is working correctly. The *AnalysisTemplate* is not dependant on Prometheus and could use a different source, such as a JSON endpoint, instead.

**analysistemplate.yaml**

```yaml
apiVersion: argoproj.io/v1alpha1
kind: AnalysisTemplate
metadata:
  name: restart-rate
spec:
  metrics:
  - name: restart-rate
    initialDelay: 2m
    successCondition: result < 2
    provider:
      prometheus:
        address: http://kube-prometheus-stack-1602-prometheus.prometheus.svc.cluster.local:9090 # DNS name for my Prometheus, find yours with kubectl describe svc ...
        query: |
          scalar(
            sum(kube_pod_container_status_restarts_total{namespace="default", container="flaky-update"}) -
            sum(kube_pod_container_status_restarts_total{namespace="default", container="flaky-update"} offset 2m)
          )
```

With the new Rollout and AnalysisTemplate we can safely try to deploy any version. Deploy for v2 is prevented with the Probes we set up. Deploy for v3 will automatically roll back when it notices that it has random crashes. And v4 will also fail. The short 2 minutes to test may still let a version pass. With more steps and pauses for analysis and more robust tests we could be more confident in our solution. Use `kubectl describe ar flaky-update-dep-6d5669dc9f-2-1` to get info for a specific AnalysisRun.

<exercise name='Exercise 4.04: Project v1.8'>

  Create an AnalysisTemplate for the project that will follow the cpu usage of all containers in the namespace.

  If the CPU usage **rate** sum for the namespace increases above a set value (you may choose a good hardcoded value for your project, may vary) within 10 minutes revert the update.

  Make sure that the application doesn't get updated if the value is set too low.

</exercise>

### Other deployment strategies ###

Kubernetes supports Recreate strategy which takes down the previous pods and replaces everything with the updated one. This creates a moment of downtime for the application but ensures that different versions are not running at the same time. Argo Rollouts supports BlueGreen strategy, in which a new version is run side by side to the new one but traffic is switched between the two at a certain point, such as after running update scripts or after your QA team has approved the new version.

<exercise name='Exercise 4.05: Project v1.9'>

  Speaking of updating.
  Our todo application could use "Done" field for todos that are already done.
  It should be a PUT request to `/todos/<id>`.

</exercise>

<quiz id="76e960b7-c5df-4cf4-ae58-e4bc486d02b2"></quiz>
