data/faq.md, before:

---
path: "/faq"
title: "FAQ"
hidden: false
information_page: true
sidebar_priority: -1000
separator_after: "Material"
---

<table-of-contents></table-of-contents>

### Is this course for me?

As this course was written by a developer it offers an introduction into Kubernetes with the eyes of a developer. This course does not go into Kubernetes administration and there are other resources such as [Kubernetes the hard way](https://github.com/kelseyhightower/kubernetes-the-hard-way) which offer a deep dive into how everything works, but course may work as a starting point.

### Google Cloud Credits?

Google has offered students with @helsinki.fi email addresses some Google Cloud Credits and everyone starting with Google Cloud has \$300 worth of free credits.

Finnish/Open University students, you will be given a @helsinki.fi address when you register to an Open University course, this will be a task for you at the end of part 1.

If you are not eligible for a @helsinki.fi email address and you have used all \$300 credits there is nothing I can do. You can complete parts 1-2 and most likely 4-5, but part 3 is required for course completion and the certificate. For the eligibility for credits check the list and link at the bottom of [registration page](/registration-and-completion).

### CKAD or CKA

At this point in time I have not completed the [CKAD](https://www.cncf.io/certification/ckad/) (or CKA) certificates, that some attendees asked me about, and as such I do not know how different the contents of this course are. But by looking at the [v1.22 curriculum](https://github.com/cncf/curriculum/blob/051242d0be69e1cd290c97abc393762ae9f2ca44/CKAD_Curriculum_v1.22.pdf) and comparing it to the contents of this course I'll deduce that while most of the contents are covered by this course there are still some subjects that this course does not cover.

There's a certificate for this course as well. But this certificate (or this course) does not have anything to do with CKAD or CKA.

Please identify the certificate if you wish to talk or ask about non-DwK certificates in the course telegram chat.

### Links or sources?

In writing this course I first and foremost used the Kubernetes documentation. They have excellent tutorials: <https://kubernetes.io/docs/tutorials/>. As the documentation can get only so far, if I had difficulties grasping a concept I used the [Kubernetes in Action](https://www.manning.com/books/kubernetes-in-action) book as well as various Google searches.

You can get Kubernetes Up and Running for free [from Microsoft](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/resources/kubernetes-up-and-running/) or [from VMWare](https://k8s.vmware.com/kubernetes-up-and-running/).

I personally had a hobby cluster in [Hetzner](https://www.hetzner.com/) that I setup with [kubespray](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubespray) that was running multiple videogame servers. I was then running [k3s](https://github.com/rancher/k3s) there with knative and some applications there for fun. I highly recommend doing something similar on your free time.

### How to get the DwK certificate?

[Submission system](https://studies.cs.helsinki.fi/stats/courses/kubernetes2024/) will have the certificate for you when you have submitted all of the exercises.

_The course material has now been updated and the 2024 edition has started unofficially. The official start is 1st of August, certificates will be then available._

Commit message:

remove mention on google credits for helsinki.fi email

data/faq.md, after:

---
path: "/faq"
title: "FAQ"
hidden: false
information_page: true
sidebar_priority: -1000
separator_after: "Material"
---

<table-of-contents></table-of-contents>

### Is this course for me?

As this course was written by a developer it offers an introduction into Kubernetes with the eyes of a developer. This course does not go into Kubernetes administration and there are other resources such as [Kubernetes the hard way](https://github.com/kelseyhightower/kubernetes-the-hard-way) which offer a deep dive into how everything works, but course may work as a starting point.

### Google Cloud Credits?

Eeveryone starting with Google Cloud has \$300 worth of free credits.

If ypu have used all \$300 credits there is nothing we can do. You can complete parts 1-2 and most likely 4-5. You may also use another cloud provider but we can not provide any help in that case.

### CKAD or CKA

At this point in time I have not completed the [CKAD](https://www.cncf.io/certification/ckad/) (or CKA) certificates, that some attendees asked me about, and as such I do not know how different the contents of this course are. But by looking at the [v1.22 curriculum](https://github.com/cncf/curriculum/blob/051242d0be69e1cd290c97abc393762ae9f2ca44/CKAD_Curriculum_v1.22.pdf) and comparing it to the contents of this course I'll deduce that while most of the contents are covered by this course there are still some subjects that this course does not cover.

There's a certificate for this course as well. But this certificate (or this course) does not have anything to do with CKAD or CKA.

Please identify the certificate if you wish to talk or ask about non-DwK certificates in the course telegram chat.

### Links or sources?

In writing this course I first and foremost used the Kubernetes documentation. They have excellent tutorials: <https://kubernetes.io/docs/tutorials/>. As the documentation can get only so far, if I had difficulties grasping a concept I used the [Kubernetes in Action](https://www.manning.com/books/kubernetes-in-action) book as well as various Google searches.

You can get Kubernetes Up and Running for free [from Microsoft](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/resources/kubernetes-up-and-running/) or [from VMWare](https://k8s.vmware.com/kubernetes-up-and-running/).

I personally had a hobby cluster in [Hetzner](https://www.hetzner.com/) that I setup with [kubespray](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubespray) that was running multiple videogame servers. I was then running [k3s](https://github.com/rancher/k3s) there with knative and some applications there for fun. I highly recommend doing something similar on your free time.

### How to get the DwK certificate?

[Submission system](https://studies.cs.helsinki.fi/stats/courses/kubernetes2024/) will have the certificate for you when you have submitted all of the exercises.

_The course material has now been updated and the 2024 edition has started unofficially. The official start is 1st of August, certificates will be then available._
